#LyX 2.3 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 544
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass scrbook
\begin_preamble
% Required for the setup of the listings.
\usepackage{xcolor}
\definecolor{ocre}{RGB}{243,102,25}
\definecolor{wwwDarkGreen}{HTML}{006400}
\definecolor{wwwDarkOrchid}{HTML}{9932CC}
\definecolor{wwwDarkOrange}{HTML}{FF8C00}
\end_preamble
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language british
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "default" "default"
\font_sans "default" "default"
\font_typewriter "default" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures true
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize 11
\spacing single
\use_hyperref true
\pdf_title "PlatformIO for the Arduino User"
\pdf_author "Norman Dunbar"
\pdf_subject "PlatformIO"
\pdf_keywords "PlatformIO Arduino AVR ATMEGA ATMEGA328"
\pdf_bookmarks true
\pdf_bookmarksnumbered false
\pdf_bookmarksopen false
\pdf_bookmarksopenlevel 1
\pdf_breaklinks false
\pdf_pdfborder true
\pdf_colorlinks true
\pdf_backref false
\pdf_pdfusetitle true
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\use_minted 0
\boxbgcolor #ff557f
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 2
\paperpagestyle default
\listings_params "backgroundcolor={\color{ocre!10}},basicstyle={\small},breakatwhitespace=false,breaklines=false,captionpos=b,commentstyle={\color{wwwDarkGreen}},deletekeywords={...},escapeinside={\%*}{*)},extendedchars=true,frame=leftline,framerule=4pt,keepspaces=true,keywordstyle={\color{blue}},morekeywords={*,...},numbers=left,numbersep=10pt,numberstyle={\color{ocre}},rulecolor={\color{ocre}},showspaces=false,showstringspaces=false,showtabs=false,stepnumber=1,stringstyle={\color{wwwDarkOrange}},tabsize=2,title={\lstname},breaklines=true,postbreak={\mbox{\textcolor{ocre}{\textbf{$\Longrightarrow$}}\space}},language={[Motorola68k]Assembler}"
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Chapter
News
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Beginners Corner
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In Beginners Corner this time, we take a look at simple file and screen
 handling.
 The code to open a text file and to display it on screen is provided with
 explanations in excruciating detail!
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Buffer overruns are handled safely and without affecting the program's output.
 EOF is a little more tricky in Assembly than in S*BASIC, and this is –
 hopefully – well explained too.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Sudoku Solver
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In this issue, the main article is all about solving Sudoku puzzles using
 the QL and Assembly Language.
 This demonstrates recursion and backtracking and uses a brute force 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

algorithm
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 to solve the puzzles.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Well, I say 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

solve
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 but in reality, it stuffs a number into the first blank cell it finds,
 and then tries, recursively, to solve the new puzzle which has one less
 blank cell! There's no finesse about it, it just hammers away until it
 – eventually – solves the puzzle, or doesn't if the puzzle can't be solved.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Multiplication
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
After many years of avoiding the matter, I've finally decided to look into
 how the QL could do multiplication of two 32 bit numbers to give a 64 bit
 result.
 It turns out to be a lot less mind numbing than I thought it would be.
 So, anyway, if I had to figure it out for myself, you might as well profit
 from my trials and tribulations!
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In this issue, there's a whole chapter about multiplying two 32 bit 
\emph on
unsigned
\emph default
 values to give a 64 bit result.
 Then I figured out that I might as well add an extra bit of code to make
 signed number multiplication 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

easy
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 as well.
 That turned out to be only a few more lines.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
The QL Wiki
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
For some time now, there has been a problem uploading and/or including graphics
 on the 
\begin_inset CommandInset href
LatexCommand href
name "QL Wiki"
target "https://qlwiki.qlforum.co.uk/"
literal "false"

\end_inset


\begin_inset Foot
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
https://qlwiki.qlforum.co.uk
\end_layout

\end_inset

 in that sometimes it works, but on others, it barfs with an 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Error 403, Forbidden
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 message.
 This affects me as well, and I have administrator privileges on the Wiki.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Investigations are ongoing, and sadly, have been for quite some time.
 We are of the opinion that the host company has done something and barfed
 things for the Wiki.
 Rob Heaton is 
\emph on
still
\emph default
 attempting to get some form of support out of the hosts, but so far, this
 is proving quite elusive, unfortunately.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
This is not a good state of affairs to be in, but at the moment, we are
 working on it as best we can, given the limitations of the hosts.
 They did apparently resolve it a while back, but it has reared its ugly
 head once again, but this time, we seem to have stumped them.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
If you are trying to insert images into your Wiki pages, and are suffering
 from this problem, please be patient.
 There is a 
\begin_inset CommandInset href
LatexCommand href
name "Wiki Topic"
target "https://qlforum.co.uk/viewforum.php?f=26"
literal "false"

\end_inset


\begin_inset Foot
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
https://qlforum.co.uk/viewforum.php?f=26
\end_layout

\end_inset

 on the QL Forum where you can report problems with images.
 Just to keep prodding us admin types!
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Occasionally I am able to get files uploaded, with a bit of hassle from
 the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

403 Forbidden
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 errors, but it can, eventually be done.
 If you need to get some images uploaded, let me know on the above link
 and I'll try my best to get them done for you.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
RIP GWASL
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
My most used assembler these days is GWASS from George Gwilt which allows
 me to assemble MC68020 instructions as well as those for the MC68008.
 In the past I have used, and occasionally still do, George Gwilt's other
 fine assembler, GWASL.
 This one is only for the MC68008 processor used in the original QL.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Unlike its big brother, GWASS, GWASL throws errors if a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

blank
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 line in the source code is not completely blank.
 If there are any unprintable characters – spaces or tabs etc – GWASL will
 record an 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

illegal instruction
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 error when it hits one of these lines.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In addition, GWASL doesn't like symbols with a dot in the name.
 So 
\family typewriter
OPW.CON
\family default
, for example, is rejected.
 This means that it's not possible to use the correct names for the SMSQ/E
 symbols and equates.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Because of this, GWASL, which I have used since 2009, is sadly being retired.
 I do have the source code for GWASL but looking through it, George has
 used some of his own libraries and macros for various parts and I don't
 have those files.
 I 
\emph on
might
\emph default
 do a disassembly on the current binary, to see if I can fix it.
 No promises though!
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
